---
title: >-
  What Coronavirus SARS-CoV-2 and COVID-19 Disease Are Telling Us: A Holistic
  Veterinary and One Health View
date: 2020-12-15T18:21:15.353Z
tags:
  - Public Health
  - Farmed Animals
  - Conservation
---
What Coronavirus SARS-CoV-2 and COVID-19 Disease Are Telling Us: A Holistic Veterinary and One Health View
https://www.ahvma.org/wp-content/uploads/What-Coronavirus-SARS-CoV-2-and-COVID-19-Disease-Are-Telling-Us-Vol-61_LR-2.pdf

 Synopsis

COVID-19: A NOT SO SIMPLE PANDEMIC
The coronavirus associated with this pandemic some contend is far less harmful than those promoting vaccinations would have us believe. There are genetic factors that can make this virus more harmful to some than to others as well as pre-existing conditions related in part to culture, socio-economics, education, nutrition and, notably, environmental factors, especially particulate air pollution and poor room ventilation where people gather. This is an issue in schools and churches, theaters and sports stadiums.

 In the latter, and increasingly in people’s homes and work places, we have concentrated electropollution. ( See entry on this website for detailed documentation) This has been shown to impair the immune and neuroendocrine systems of many animal species subjected to laboratory studies of exposure to the kind of non-ionizing radiation and electromagnetic fields generated by some telecommunication systems. All of these factors make any new contagious virus potentially fatal and there are future emerging viral pandemics on the horizon according to epidemiologists.

 So these factors all need to be addressed, especially the anthropogenic environmental contributions to our susceptibility to contagious and infectious diseases. Simply investing in more vaccinations and drug-treatments will be profitable for a few but not beneficial for most and indeed, costly. Since animals wild and domesticated are the source of new and already established epidemic and pandemic diseases which constantly mutate, calling for new vaccines and drug treatments, our continued and cruel, profit-driven exploitation of these other species should be terminated for their own well-being as well as our own.

