site/content/_index.md, before:

---
title: "One Earth, One Health"
subtitle: "Dedicated to advancing the understanding and appreciation of other animals, improving their health and well-being and our relationships with them and the natural world."
image: /img/ipan-flute.jpg
welcome:
    heading: "Welcome"
    text: "Welcome all animal lovers, owners, trainers, breeders, care-providers, and students of animal care, health, welfare and bioethics to my website. I am a veterinarian, graduating from the Royal Veterinary College, London, England in 1962. I did post-graduate research on animal behavior and development in the US, where I now reside, earning a PhD in medicine, and a DSc in ethology/animal behavior from the University of London. I am a member of the British Veterinary Association, the American Holistic Veterinary Medical Association and an Honor Roll member of the American Veterinary Medical Association."
column:
    heading: "Animal Doctor Column"
    text: "I have been writing the syndicated newspaper column “Animal Doctor” for over 40 years and this has given me a wide-angle view of the health and behavioral issues affecting companion animals."
    link: https://www.uexpress.com/animal-doctor
book:
    heading: "India's Animals: Helping the Sacred & the Suffering"
    text: "This richly illustrated book details the trials and tribulations of setting up an animal shelter and free veterinary services in the heart of a unique wildlife region in S. India, the UNESCO designated Nilgiris Biosphere Reserve."
project:
    heading: "India Project For Animals and Nature (IPAN)"
    text: "IPAN provided veterinary services to over a dozen villages and remote tribal settlements with IPAN's 24-hour mobile veterinary clinic/ambulance, fully operational hospital, and permanent animal refuge."
    buttonText: "Learn more"
    buttonLink: "/ipan"
---

Commit message:

Add Deanna Krantz section to homepage

site/content/_index.md, after:

---
title: "One Earth, One Health"
subtitle: "Dedicated to advancing the understanding and appreciation of other animals, improving their health and well-being and our relationships with them and the natural world."
image: /img/ipan-flute.jpg
welcome:
    heading: "Welcome"
    text: "Welcome all animal lovers, owners, trainers, breeders, care-providers, and students of animal care, health, welfare and bioethics to my website. I am a veterinarian, graduating from the Royal Veterinary College, London, England in 1962. I did post-graduate research on animal behavior and development in the US, where I now reside, earning a PhD in medicine, and a DSc in ethology/animal behavior from the University of London. I am a member of the British Veterinary Association, the American Holistic Veterinary Medical Association and an Honor Roll member of the American Veterinary Medical Association."
column:
    heading: "Animal Doctor Column"
    text: "I have been writing the syndicated newspaper column “Animal Doctor” for over 40 years and this has given me a wide-angle view of the health and behavioral issues affecting companion animals."
    link: https://www.uexpress.com/animal-doctor
book:
    heading: "India's Animals: Helping the Sacred & the Suffering"
    text: "This richly illustrated book details the trials and tribulations of setting up an animal shelter and free veterinary services in the heart of a unique wildlife region in S. India, the UNESCO designated Nilgiris Biosphere Reserve."
deanna:
    heading: "Deanna Krantz"
    text: "My wife, Deanna Krantz, has turned her love of animals and respect for life into direct action in India. She founded and directed India Project for Animals & Nature (IPAN) to indirectly help the indigenous village and tribal peoples by improving the health and well-being of their farmed animals and of the dogs and cats in these communities. Here is her interview excerpted from People Promoting and People Opposing Animal Rights by John Kistler."
---
